.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md, before:

---
name: 🐛 Bug Report
about: Did something not work as expected?
---

<!---
Thanks for filing an issue 😄 ! Before you submit, please read the following:

Search open/closed issues before submitting since someone might have asked the same thing before!
-->

# 🐛 Bug Report

<!--- Provide a general summary of the issue here -->

Repro link https://stackblitz.com/edit/au2-conventions?file=src%2Fmy-app.html

## 🤔 Expected Behavior

<!--- Tell us what should happen -->

## 😯 Current Behavior

<!--- Tell us what happens instead of the expected behavior -->

<!--- If you are seeing an error, please include the full error message and stack trace -->

## 💁 Possible Solution

<!--- Not obligatory, but suggest a fix/reason for the bug -->

## 🔦 Context

<!--- How has this issue affected you? What are you trying to accomplish? -->

<!--- Providing context helps us come up with a solution that is most useful in the real world -->

## 💻 Code Sample

<!-- Please provide a code repository, gist, code snippet or sample files to reproduce the issue -->

## 🌍 Your Environment

<!--- Include as many relevant details as possible about the environment you experienced the bug in -->

| Software         | Version(s) |
| ---------------- | ---------- |
| Aurelia          |
| Language         |
| Browser          |
| Bundler          |
| Operating System |
| NPM/Node/Yarn    |

<!-- Love Aurelia? Please consider supporting our collective:
👉  https://opencollective.com/aurelia -->

Commit message:

chore: add repro link to bug report and FR

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md, after:

---
name: 🐛 Bug Report
about: Did something not work as expected?
---

<!-- Thanks for filing an issue 😄 ! Before you submit, please read the following:

Search open/closed issues before submitting since someone might have asked the same thing before! -->

# 🐛 Bug Report

<!-- Provide a general summary of the issue here -->

Repro link https://stackblitz.com/edit/au2-conventions?file=src%2Fmy-app.html

## 🤔 Expected Behavior

<!-- Tell us what should happen -->

## 😯 Current Behavior

<!--- Tell us what happens instead of the expected behavior -->

<!--- If you are seeing an error, please include the full error message and stack trace -->

It is best to have a bug report with a repro.
Create one based on this Stackblitz https://stackblitz.com/edit/au2-conventions?file=src%2Fmy-app.html

## 💁 Possible Solution

<!-- Not obligatory, but suggest a fix/reason for the bug -->

## 🔦 Context

<!--- How has this issue affected you? What are you trying to accomplish? -->

<!--- Providing context helps us come up with a solution that is most useful in the real world -->

## 💻 Code Sample

<!-- Please provide a code repository, gist, code snippet or sample files to reproduce the issue -->

## 🌍 Your Environment

<!--- Include as many relevant details as possible about the environment you experienced the bug in -->

| Software         | Version(s) |
| ---------------- | ---------- |
| Aurelia          |
| Language         |
| Browser          |
| Bundler          |
| Operating System |
| NPM/Node/Yarn    |

<!-- Love Aurelia? Please consider supporting our collective:
👉  https://opencollective.com/aurelia -->
