docs/user-docs/developer-guides/router-lite/navigating.md, before:

---
description: Learn to navigate from one view to another using the Router-Lite.
---

# Navigating

This section details the various ways that you can use to navigate from one part of your application to another part.
For performing navigation the router-lite offers couple of alternatives, namely the `href` and the `load` custom attributes, and the `IRouter#load` method.

## Using `href` custom attribute

You can use the `href` custom attribute with an `a` (anchor) tag, with a string value.
When the users click this link, the router-lite performs the navigation.
This can be seen in action in the live example below.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-getting-started?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/main.ts" %}

The example shows that there are two configured routes, `home` and `about`, and in markup there are two anchor tags that points to these routes.
Clicking those links the users can navigate to the desired components, as it is expected.

```html
<nav>
  <a href="home">Home</a>
  <a href="about">About</a>
</nav>
```

You can also use the parameterized routes with the `href` attribute, exactly the same way.
To this end, you need to put the parameter value in the path itself and use the parameterized path in the `href` attribute.
This is shown in the example below.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-href-with-bound-parameter?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/my-app.ts" %}

The example shows two configured routes; one with an optional parameter.
The markup has three anchor tags as follows:

```html
<nav>
  <a href="home">Home</a>
  <a href="about">About</a>
  <a href="about/42">About/42</a>
</nav>
```

The last `href` attribute is an example of a parameterized route.

### Navigate in current routing context

The navigation using `href` attribute always happens in the current routing context; that is, the routing instruction will be successful if and only the route is configured in the current routing parent.
This is shown in the example below.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-hierarchical-viewport-2mcxwj?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/main.ts" %}

In the example, the root component has two child-routes (`c1`, `c2`) and every child component in turn has 2 child-routes (`gc11`, and `gc12` and `gc21`, and `gc22` respectively) of their own.
In this case, any `href` pointing to any of the immediate child-routes (and thus configured in the current routing parent) works as expected.
However, when an `href`, like below, is used to navigate from one child component to another child component, it does not work.

```html
 <a href="c2">c2 (doesn't work)</a>
```

In such cases, the router-lite offers the following syntax to make such navigation possible.

```html
<a href="../c2">../c2 (works)</a>
```

### Bypassing the `href` custom attribute

By default the router-lite enables usage of the `href` custom attribute, as that ensure that router-lite handles the routing instructions by default.
There might be cases, where you want to avoid that.
If you want to globally deactivate the usage of `href`, then you can customize the router configuration by setting `false` to the [`useHref` configuration option](./router-configuration.md#enable-or-disable-the-usage-of-the-href-custom-attribute-using-usehref).

To disable/bypass the default handling of router-lite for any particular `href` attribute, you can avail many different ways as per your need and convenience.

- Using `external` or `data-external` attribute on the `a` tag.
- Using a non-null value for the `target`, other than the current window name, or `_self`.

Other than that, when clicking the link if either of the `alt`, `ctrl`, `shift`, `meta` key is pressed, the router-lite ignores the routing instruction.

Following example demonstrate these options.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-bypassing-href?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/my-app.html" %}

## Using the Router API

Router offers the `load` method that can be used to perform navigation.
To this end, you have to first inject the router into your component.
This can be done by using the `IRouter` decorator on your component constructor method as shown in the example below.

```typescript
import { IRouter, IRouteableComponent } from '@aurelia/router-lite';

export class MyComponent {
  public constructor(@IRouter private readonly router: IRouter) { }
}
```

Once you have an injected instance of the router, you can use the `load` method to perform navigation.
The `load` method supports many overloads, which are outlined below.

### Navigating without options

The `load` method can accept a simple string value allowing you to navigate to another component without needing to supply any configuration options.

```typescript
import { IRouter, IRouteableComponent } from '@aurelia/router';

export class MyComponent implements IRouteableComponent {
    constructor(@IRouter private router: IRouter) {

    }

    async viewProducts() {
        await this.router.load('/products');
    }
}
```

You could also use the string value method to pass parameter values and do something like this where our route expects a product ID and we pass 12:

```typescript
import { IRouter, IRouteableComponent } from '@aurelia/router';

export class MyComponent implements IRouteableComponent {
    constructor(@IRouter private router: IRouter) {

    }

    async viewProducts() {
        await this.router.load(`/products/12`);
    }
}
```

### Specifying load options

The router instance `load` method allows you to specify different properties on a per-use basis. The most common one being the `title` property to allow you to modify the title as you navigate to your route.

A list of available load options can be found below:

* `title` — Sets the title of the component being loaded
* `queryParams` — Specify an object to be serialized to a query string, and then set to the query string of the new URL.
* `fragment` — Specify the hash fragment for the new URL.

These option values can be specified as follows and when needed:

```typescript
import { IRouter, IRouteableComponent } from '@aurelia/router';

export class MyComponent implements IRouteableComponent {
    constructor(@IRouter private router: IRouter) {

    }

    async viewProduct() {
        await this.router.load('products', {
            title: 'My product',
            queryParams: {
                prop1: 'val',
                tracking: 'asdasdjaks232'
            },
            fragment: 'jfjdjf'
        });
    }
}
```

### HTML `load` attribute

The router also allows you to decorate links and buttons in your application using a `load` attribute which works the same way as the router instance `load` method.

If you have routes defined on a root level (inside of `my-app.ts`) you will need to add a forward slash in front of any routes you attempt to load. The following would work in the case of an application using configured routes.

```markup
<a load="/products/12">Product #12</a>
```

The load attribute can do more than just accept a string value. You can also bind to the load attribute as well for more explicit routing. The following example is a bit redundant as specifying `route:product` would be the same as specifying `load="product"` but if you're wanting more explicit routing, it conveys the intent better.

```html
<a load="route:product;">My Route</a>
```

And where things really start to get interesting is when you want to pass parameters to a route. We use the `params` configuration property to specify parameters.

```html
<a load="route:profile; params.bind:{name: 'rob'}">View Profile</a>
```

In the above example, we provide the route (`id`) value (via `route: profile`). But, then also provide an object of parameters (via `params.bind: { name: 'rob' }`). These parameter values correspond to any parameters configured in your route definition. In our case, our route looks like this:

```typescript
{
    id: 'profile',
    path: 'profile/:name',
    component: () => import('./view-profile'),
    title: 'View Profile'
},
```

## Handling unknown components

If you are using the router to render components in your application, there might be situations where a component attempts to be rendered that does not exist. This can happen while using direct routing (not configured routing)

{% hint style="warning" %}
This section is not for catch-all/404 routes. If you are using configured routing, you are looking for the [section on catch-all routes here](creating-routes.md#catch-all-404-not-found-route).
{% endhint %}

To add in fallback behavior, we can do this two ways. The `fallback` attribute on the `<au-viewport>` element or in the router `customize` method (code).

### Create the fallback component

Let's create the `missing-page` component (this is required or the fallback behavior will not work). First, we'll create the view-model for our `missing-page` component.

{% code title="missing-page.ts" %}
```typescript
export class MissingPage {
  public static parameters = ['id'];
  public missingComponent: string ;

  public load(parameters: {id: string}): void {
    this.missingComponent = parameters.id;
  }
}
```
{% endcode %}

For the `fallback` component, an ID gets passed as a parameter which is the value from the URL. If you were to attempt to visit a non-existent route called "ROB" the `missingComponent` value would be ROB.

Now, the HTML.

{% code title="missing-page.html" %}
```html
<h3>Ouch! I couldn't find '${missingComponent}'!</h3>
```
{% endcode %}

### Programmatically

By using the `fallback` property on the `customize` method when we register the router, we can pass a component.

```typescript
import Aurelia from 'aurelia';
import { RouterConfiguration } from '@aurelia/router';
import { MyApp } from './my-app';
import { MissingPage } from './missing-page';

Aurelia
  .register(RouterConfiguration.customize({
    fallback: MissingPage,
  }))
  .app(MyApp)
  .start();
```

### Attribute

Sometimes the `fallback` attribute can be the prefered approach to registering a fallback. Import your fallback component and pass the name to the `fallback` attribute. Same result, but it doesn't require touching the router registration.

{% code title="my-app.html" %}
```html
<import from="./missing-page"></import>

<au-viewport fallback="missing-page"></au-viewport>
```
{% endcode %}

## Redirecting

Depending on the scenario, you will want to redirect users in your application. Unlike using the `load` API on the router where we manually route (for example, after logging in) redirection allows us to redirect inside router hooks.

Please see the [Routing Lifecycle](routing-lifecycle.md#canload) section to learn how to implement redirection inside of your components.

Commit message:

docs(router-lite/href): named and sibling viewport

docs/user-docs/developer-guides/router-lite/navigating.md, after:

---
description: Learn to navigate from one view to another using the Router-Lite.
---

# Navigating

This section details the various ways that you can use to navigate from one part of your application to another part.
For performing navigation the router-lite offers couple of alternatives, namely the `href` and the `load` custom attributes, and the `IRouter#load` method.

## Using `href` custom attribute

You can use the `href` custom attribute with an `a` (anchor) tag, with a string value.
When the users click this link, the router-lite performs the navigation.
This can be seen in action in the live example below.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-getting-started?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/main.ts" %}

The example shows that there are two configured routes, `home` and `about`, and in markup there are two anchor tags that points to these routes.
Clicking those links the users can navigate to the desired components, as it is expected.

```html
<nav>
  <a href="home">Home</a>
  <a href="about">About</a>
</nav>
```

You can also use the parameterized routes with the `href` attribute, exactly the same way.
To this end, you need to put the parameter value in the path itself and use the parameterized path in the `href` attribute.
This is shown in the example below.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-href-with-bound-parameter?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/my-app.ts" %}

The example shows two configured routes; one with an optional parameter.
The markup has three anchor tags as follows:

```html
<nav>
  <a href="home">Home</a>
  <a href="about">About</a>
  <a href="about/42">About/42</a>
</nav>
```

The last `href` attribute is an example of a parameterized route.

### Targeting viewports

You can target [named](./viewports.md#named-viewports) and/or [sibling](./viewports.md#sibling-viewports) viewports.
To this end, you can use the following syntax: `{path1}@{viewport-name}[+{path2}@{sibling-viewport-name}]`.
The following live example, demonstrates that.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-named-sibling-viewport-href?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/my-app.html" %}

### Navigate in current routing context

The navigation using `href` attribute always happens in the current routing context; that is, the routing instruction will be successful if and only the route is configured in the current routing parent.
This is shown in the example below.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-hierarchical-viewport-2mcxwj?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/main.ts" %}

In the example, the root component has two child-routes (`c1`, `c2`) and every child component in turn has 2 child-routes (`gc11`, and `gc12` and `gc21`, and `gc22` respectively) of their own.
In this case, any `href` pointing to any of the immediate child-routes (and thus configured in the current routing parent) works as expected.
However, when an `href`, like below, is used to navigate from one child component to another child component, it does not work.

```html
 <a href="c2">c2 (doesn't work)</a>
```

In such cases, the router-lite offers the following syntax to make such navigation possible.

```html
<a href="../c2">../c2 (works)</a>
```

### Bypassing the `href` custom attribute

By default the router-lite enables usage of the `href` custom attribute, as that ensure that router-lite handles the routing instructions by default.
There might be cases, where you want to avoid that.
If you want to globally deactivate the usage of `href`, then you can customize the router configuration by setting `false` to the [`useHref` configuration option](./router-configuration.md#enable-or-disable-the-usage-of-the-href-custom-attribute-using-usehref).

To disable/bypass the default handling of router-lite for any particular `href` attribute, you can avail many different ways as per your need and convenience.

- Using `external` or `data-external` attribute on the `a` tag.
- Using a non-null value for the `target`, other than the current window name, or `_self`.

Other than that, when clicking the link if either of the `alt`, `ctrl`, `shift`, `meta` key is pressed, the router-lite ignores the routing instruction.

Following example demonstrate these options.

{% embed url="https://stackblitz.com/edit/router-lite-bypassing-href?ctl=1&embed=1&file=src/my-app.html" %}

## Using the Router API

Router offers the `load` method that can be used to perform navigation.
To this end, you have to first inject the router into your component.
This can be done by using the `IRouter` decorator on your component constructor method as shown in the example below.

```typescript
import { IRouter, IRouteableComponent } from '@aurelia/router-lite';

export class MyComponent {
  public constructor(@IRouter private readonly router: IRouter) { }
}
```

Once you have an injected instance of the router, you can use the `load` method to perform navigation.
The `load` method supports many overloads, which are outlined below.

### Navigating without options

The `load` method can accept a simple string value allowing you to navigate to another component without needing to supply any configuration options.

```typescript
import { IRouter, IRouteableComponent } from '@aurelia/router';

export class MyComponent implements IRouteableComponent {
    constructor(@IRouter private router: IRouter) {

    }

    async viewProducts() {
        await this.router.load('/products');
    }
}
```

You could also use the string value method to pass parameter values and do something like this where our route expects a product ID and we pass 12:

```typescript
import { IRouter, IRouteableComponent } from '@aurelia/router';

export class MyComponent implements IRouteableComponent {
    constructor(@IRouter private router: IRouter) {

    }

    async viewProducts() {
        await this.router.load(`/products/12`);
    }
}
```

### Specifying load options

The router instance `load` method allows you to specify different properties on a per-use basis. The most common one being the `title` property to allow you to modify the title as you navigate to your route.

A list of available load options can be found below:

* `title` — Sets the title of the component being loaded
* `queryParams` — Specify an object to be serialized to a query string, and then set to the query string of the new URL.
* `fragment` — Specify the hash fragment for the new URL.

These option values can be specified as follows and when needed:

```typescript
import { IRouter, IRouteableComponent } from '@aurelia/router';

export class MyComponent implements IRouteableComponent {
    constructor(@IRouter private router: IRouter) {

    }

    async viewProduct() {
        await this.router.load('products', {
            title: 'My product',
            queryParams: {
                prop1: 'val',
                tracking: 'asdasdjaks232'
            },
            fragment: 'jfjdjf'
        });
    }
}
```

### HTML `load` attribute

The router also allows you to decorate links and buttons in your application using a `load` attribute which works the same way as the router instance `load` method.

If you have routes defined on a root level (inside of `my-app.ts`) you will need to add a forward slash in front of any routes you attempt to load. The following would work in the case of an application using configured routes.

```markup
<a load="/products/12">Product #12</a>
```

The load attribute can do more than just accept a string value. You can also bind to the load attribute as well for more explicit routing. The following example is a bit redundant as specifying `route:product` would be the same as specifying `load="product"` but if you're wanting more explicit routing, it conveys the intent better.

```html
<a load="route:product;">My Route</a>
```

And where things really start to get interesting is when you want to pass parameters to a route. We use the `params` configuration property to specify parameters.

```html
<a load="route:profile; params.bind:{name: 'rob'}">View Profile</a>
```

In the above example, we provide the route (`id`) value (via `route: profile`). But, then also provide an object of parameters (via `params.bind: { name: 'rob' }`). These parameter values correspond to any parameters configured in your route definition. In our case, our route looks like this:

```typescript
{
    id: 'profile',
    path: 'profile/:name',
    component: () => import('./view-profile'),
    title: 'View Profile'
},
```

## Handling unknown components

If you are using the router to render components in your application, there might be situations where a component attempts to be rendered that does not exist. This can happen while using direct routing (not configured routing)

{% hint style="warning" %}
This section is not for catch-all/404 routes. If you are using configured routing, you are looking for the [section on catch-all routes here](creating-routes.md#catch-all-404-not-found-route).
{% endhint %}

To add in fallback behavior, we can do this two ways. The `fallback` attribute on the `<au-viewport>` element or in the router `customize` method (code).

### Create the fallback component

Let's create the `missing-page` component (this is required or the fallback behavior will not work). First, we'll create the view-model for our `missing-page` component.

{% code title="missing-page.ts" %}
```typescript
export class MissingPage {
  public static parameters = ['id'];
  public missingComponent: string ;

  public load(parameters: {id: string}): void {
    this.missingComponent = parameters.id;
  }
}
```
{% endcode %}

For the `fallback` component, an ID gets passed as a parameter which is the value from the URL. If you were to attempt to visit a non-existent route called "ROB" the `missingComponent` value would be ROB.

Now, the HTML.

{% code title="missing-page.html" %}
```html
<h3>Ouch! I couldn't find '${missingComponent}'!</h3>
```
{% endcode %}

### Programmatically

By using the `fallback` property on the `customize` method when we register the router, we can pass a component.

```typescript
import Aurelia from 'aurelia';
import { RouterConfiguration } from '@aurelia/router';
import { MyApp } from './my-app';
import { MissingPage } from './missing-page';

Aurelia
  .register(RouterConfiguration.customize({
    fallback: MissingPage,
  }))
  .app(MyApp)
  .start();
```

### Attribute

Sometimes the `fallback` attribute can be the prefered approach to registering a fallback. Import your fallback component and pass the name to the `fallback` attribute. Same result, but it doesn't require touching the router registration.

{% code title="my-app.html" %}
```html
<import from="./missing-page"></import>

<au-viewport fallback="missing-page"></au-viewport>
```
{% endcode %}

## Redirecting

Depending on the scenario, you will want to redirect users in your application. Unlike using the `load` API on the router where we manually route (for example, after logging in) redirection allows us to redirect inside router hooks.

Please see the [Routing Lifecycle](routing-lifecycle.md#canload) section to learn how to implement redirection inside of your components.
